# Notes on writing

**Rough working notes on writing, by Michael Nielsen:** These are
  _rough_ notes.  I'm writing them to help improve my polished pieces
  of writing.  They're not intended as models of prose in themselves.

**Advice on writing is really advice on the psychology of reading:**
  Advice on writing is sometimes written in a tough-sounding,
  objective style.  "Avoid adverbs".  "Avoid needless words".
  Justifications for these rules are couched in terms of generalities
  about what makes good writing.  But good writing is not an intrinsic
  property of the text.  Instead, it's a quality of the relationship
  between reader and what is written.  And so good advice on writing
  is really about how to change that relationship to achieve the
  author's desired end.  In some sense, we're build up a _theory_ of
  that relationship, a psychology of reading.  And the better our
  theory of that psychology, the better our writing.

## Titles

**A Brief History of Time (Hawking):** Amusing, in multiple ways: the
  self-reference of having a history of time; the self-reference that
  it's brief; and finally the fact that the title is a pretty darned
  literal description of the book.
  
**The Future of Ideas (Lessig):** I'm not sure whether this is a good
  title or not.  It's ambitious and provocative, a big-picture title.
  It almost forces the reader to confront the question: what is the
  future of ideas?  But it's huge scope also means that it's a vague
  title.  And, in the end, it's not quite what the book is about.  The
  book is really about the future of expression, i.e., the future of
  how ideas and culture are expressed.  This makes the title somewhat
  elusive, the kind where, after reading the book, you may not recall
  the title.

**The Society of Mind (Minsky):** What I like about this title is that
  it really is exactly what the book is about.  After you've read the
  book you won't have any difficulty recalling the title.  A problem
  with the title is that it's not really obvious to the prospective
  reader what it means.  It does, at least, sound pregnant with
  meaning, and it's also an idea that is relatively easy to explain.
  It might, perhaps, have been helped by a subtitle: "how the mind
  arises through many agents", or something in that vein.  (That's not
  a good subtitle, but something along those lines might have worked.)

**Juxtaposition:** Many titles juxtapose two words (or concepts) that
  are not usually together.  This is particularly effective when the
  juxtaposition is surprising, but in retrospect meaningful.  "The
  Selfish Gene" is, for example, more surprising than "The Future of
  Ideas".  "Future Shock" is an excellent juxtaposition. 


**Three types of titles:** (1) Books that describe a subject or field.
These titles name the subject or field, perhaps with a simple
modifier: *Introduction to algorithms*; *Principles of neuroscience*;
**Quantum Computation and Quantum Information*.  (2) Journalistic
books that are principally reporting.  These may follow the pattern of
(1), or perhaps have a quirkier title that reflects some aspect of the
subject or field under investigation.  *In the plex* is an example of
the quirky approach.  *Complexity* is an example that follows (1).
(3) Idea books, i.e., books which explore a new concept or propose a
theory.  Here, the title ideally names the central new concept or
theory.  *The Selfish Gene*.  *The Ingenuity Gap*.  *Everything is
Miscellaneous*.  *One the Origin of Species by Means of Natural
Selection*.  *Biology is Technology*.  Failing that, the title
describes the problem to be addressed: *The Trouble With Physics*.
*Reinventing Discovery*.

## Opening sentences

**Is the sentence striking enough to make the reader want to read
  more?**

**Does the sentence start as late as possible?**

**When in trouble, quickly brainstorm ten or more opening sentences:**
  On occasion, one comes to a piece of writing with the perfect
  opening sentence.  Take the good fortune and run!  
  
  When one does not have that sentence, things become difficult.  It's
  tempting to compromise, and to accept a mediocre opening sentence.
  This is a bad mistake.  The opening sentence is the reader's
  introduction to your writing.  A mediocre opening is statement that
  you're not going to make good use of their time.  It's also a
  turn-off for you as an author, making you less excited about your
  project.  By contrast, a good opening sentence establishes trust
  with the reader, and helps excite you about your own work.
    
  So what to do when you're having trouble finding a good opening
  sentence?
  
  In my opinion: just start brainstorming.  Quickly generate 10 or
  more opening sentences.  Don't worry about whether they're good or
  not.  Instead, try to connect with many different ways of thinking
  about the subject at hand.  Then, once you've got a stock of
  sentences, start to think analytically about the sentences.  What
  makes each one good or bad?  Can you improve any of the sentences?
  Do they suggest more ideas for sentences?
  
  This is a time-intensive process.  It can feel like wasted time --
  you might end up spending an hour (or even more!) on this.  But it's
  not wasted time.  The opening sentence is the beginning of your
  relationship with the reader, and with your own piece of work.  On
  both counts you want things to start off on the right foot.
  
  Many of these comments apply also to the title, subtitle, and to the
  opening paragraph.  Note that a great opening paragraph can, to a
  considerable extent, compensate for a less-than-great opening
  sentence.  Of course, it's better to have both.
    
### Opening sentence: "How Buildings Learn" (Brand)

> Year after year, the cultural elite of San Francisco is treated to
> the sight of its pre-eminent ladies, resplendently gowned, lined up
> in public waiting to pee.

A terrific opening.  The observation is striking, true, interesting,
funny, and, it turns out, a good introduction to the topic at hand.  

I especially like the humorous contrast.  Brand starts with lofty
language: "cultural elite", "resplendently gowned", etc.  But then we
have the crass "waiting to pee".  If you toned down the lofty
language, or toned up the crass language, the sentence would not be
nearly as funny.  Furthermore, while the observation would remain
true, it would be a less interesting truth.

### Opening sentence: "The Selfish Gene" (Dawkins)

> Intelligent life on a planet comes of age when it first works out
> the reason for its own existence

It's a provocative assertion.  Possibly wrong, certainly contentious.
But interesting, in a let's-stay-up-talking-to-3am kind of way, a
kicker of a conversation starter.  The phrase "on a planet" could
arguably be omitted.  It might be better to say something like: "An
intelligent species comes of age when...".

### Opening sentence: "How to do what you love" (Graham)

> To do something well you have to like it.

A simple assertion about reality.  It has power because: (a) if true,
it has profound consequences for how we live; (b) it's almost but not
quite true (creating tension); and especially (c) many of us are in
the uncomfortable position of both believing it's largely correct, but
not always acting on it.

The result is that there's a lot immediately on the line, and
considerable tension in the air.  Graham has started with the kind of
near-truism that we _should_ think about and act upon, but often
don't, because we're made uncomfortable by the gap between the truth
of the assertion and the reality of our lives.

### Opening sentence: "What Technology Wants" (Kelly)

> For most of my life I owned very little.

### Opening sentence: "A Brief History of Time" (Hawking)

> A well-known scientist (some say it was Bertrand Russell) once gave
> a public lecture on astronomy.

This is scene-setting, an introduction to a story.  It has the
advantage that the tone is light.  The "some say it was Bertrand
Russell" even makes the point that it is determinedly light and
informal!

### Opening sentence: "The Language Instinct" (Pinker)

> As you are reading these words, you are taking part in one of the
> wonders of the natural world.

### Opening sentence: "Cosmos" (Sagan)

> In ancient times, in everyday speech and custom, the most mundane
> happenings were connected with the grandest cosmic events.

This sentence describes a striking phenomenon.  But it loses something
because it leaves vague exactly what is being connected to what.

### Opening sentence: "A Planet of Viruses" (Zimmer)

> Fifty miles southeast of the Mexican city of Chihuahua is a dry,
> bare mountain range called Sierra de Naica.

# Danger words

**Interesting:** A bad tic is to announce interestingness.  This is a
  tic to which many academics and ex-academics (including myself) are
  susceptible:

> "It's interesting to consider..."  

> "An interesting example..."

There are several problem with these common uses of "interesting".
First, you're instructing the reader how they should feel, when you
should instead be making them feel that way by your _interesting_
prose.  Second, these uses are vague.  What exactly is the interesting
aspect of the subjects under discussion?

The first example above can be rewritten as
"Consider...". "Interesting" can be elided completely from the second
example.

The problem with "interesting" is when it's used because you lack
confidence.  It's announcing "hey, this next topic might sound boring,
but I promise you, it's interesting".  It subtly signals the opposite.
It's telling the reader that the subject sounds boring.  The solution
is to _make_ it interesting, right from the start.  Often, this means
deleting your sentence about how interesting the topic to come is, and
instead just getting on with it.  But make damn sure your discussion
is interesting!

**Quite:** The second-worst of the adverbs.  Much of what is said
  below about "very" applies also to "quite", with only the obvious
  changes.

**Very:** The worst of the adverbs.  Many uses of "very" can be
  omitted.  It is often used to intensify descriptions:
  
> He was a very important person.

> She looked very angry.

> Jake would very much like to eat lunch.

Unfortunately, "very" is so generic that gains in intensity due to its
use are often offset by the dilution caused by using an extra word.
It's rarely worth the tradeoff.  The best that can be said is that if
used _very_ sparingly, the rareness of the occurrence may serve as a
sign to the reader that the writer really does mean business.

In the first two sentences above the word "very" can be omitted with
little loss.  If "very" is essential to the sentence, then its work
should be done by the surrounding context.  Show us his great
importance; show her great anger.  Merely using "very" will not
convince us!

The third sentence is more complex.  Omission is unsatisfactory:

> Jake would like to eat lunch.

Something is lost here, since the intensity in "very much" is _very
much_ the point of the original sentence.  Unfortunately, "very much"
remains weak due to its generic nature.  It's better to replace the
entire construction with something specific:

> Jake was ravenous for lunch.

There are other times, however, when "very" can be used well.  Here's
an acceptable use, in dialogue:

> "Was she angry?"
>
> "Very"

Again, in this example "very" is being used with a specific purpose,
not as a generic intensifer.  And it works particularly well because
it makes its xpoint with such economy.

# On Classic Style

Notes on classic writing style, as explained in Francis-Noel Thomas
and Mark Turner's book <a
href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0691147434/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=michaniels-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0691147434">Clear
and Simple as the Truth</a><img
src="http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=michaniels-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0691147434"
width="1" height="1" border="0" alt="" style="border:none !important;
margin:0px !important;" />.

**Beware classic style if you've not yet mastered a subject:**
Sometimes, you wish to write about a subject, even though you haven't
yet mastered that subject.  It is difficult to write on such a subject
in classic style, because the assumptions of classic style very nearly
imply mastery.  It is easier to instead slip occasionally into a
personal style, explaining your exploration of the subject, and the
limits of your knowledge.  In such cases it may work to use a hybrid
style, in which you alternate the personal with the classic.  Feynman
occasionally uses this style, either to explain his own thinking, or
to explain the hypothetical thinking of others.


